(1) The P680 type of this molecule performs photolysis of water. Located in thylakoid membranes, this
molecule contains a porphyrin ring with a central magnesium ion. The absorption spectrum of this molecule
peaks at red and blue wavelengths, and the (*) autumn change in leaf color is due to the its breakdown. For ten
points, name this molecule that absorbs sunlight energy needed for photosynthesis, and that gives plants a green
color.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
(2) This state was once represented by four-term SEnator Barbara Boxer. This state’s Congresswoman Anna
Eshoo was the first representative contacted by Christine Blasey Ford to discuss her allegations about Brett
Kavanaugh; Eshoo then referred Ford to this state’s senior Senator. (*) Kamala Harris and Dianne Feinstein
represent, for ten points, what state that has 55 electoral votes, the most populous state in the US?
ANSWER: California
(3) This president was opposed by the “Four Horsemen,” a conservative block of the Supreme Court, and he
failed in a controversial attempt to “pack” more justices on the Court. This man created new agencies like
the (*) Tennessee Valley Authority and WPA to fight the Great Depression. For ten points, name this president who
expanded the federal government through his New Deal policies while suffering from polio.
ANSWER: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (accept FDR; prompt on “Roosevelt” alone)
(4) This god was honored with hymns called dithyrambs at the Lenaia festival, and he was obeyed by
female followers, like Agave, who were called maenads. This god rescued (*) Ariadne after she was deserted
by Theseus. The death of this god’s mother, Semele, prompted Zeus to sew this god into his thigh, making him
“twice-born.” For ten points, name this Greek god of wine.
ANSWER: Dionysus (accept Bacchus until “Greek” is read)
(5) This process generates granules in the photosphere of stars. Tectonic plates move because of this type of
current in the mantle. Atmospheric Hadley cells swap (*) dry air for moist in the tropics through this process,
and the “forced” type uses a blanket of hot air to cook food evenly in a namesake oven. For ten points, name this
process that transfers heat by the motion of a fluid.
ANSWER: convection (accept word forms like convecting)
(6) This work’s protagonist is visited by man who carries an empty, rusty scabbard and has more than
eighteen hundred brothers. In this work, the chained-up ghost of Jacob (*) Marley, and a ghost of a holiday
“Yet to Come” warn of the possible fate of Bob Cratchit’s son. For ten points, name this novella by Charles Dickens,
in which Ebeneezer Scrooge gives food to Tiny Tim’s family after he learns to appreciate the title winter holiday.
ANSWER: A Christmas Carol
(7) This note’s major key was used for George Bizet’s [zhorzh bee-zay’s] only symphony and Ravel’s Bolero.
This note is the dominant of the key of F. Brahms’ first symphony starts in this note’s minor key and finish in
its major, as does Beethoven’s (*) fifth symphony. This key’s major scale is played on all white keys on a piano.
For ten points, name this note whose major key has no flats or sharps, and which is found one whole step below D.
ANSWER: C (accept C major after “major” is read; accept c minor after “minor” is read; do not accept C sharp or
C flat)
(8) A German one of these political organizations grew out of the Spartacus League, which was co-founded
by Rosa Luxemburg. These groups were once organized in the Third International, also known as the
Comintern. Every member country within the (*) Warsaw Pact was led by this type of political party, most of
which lost power around 1990. For ten points, name this type of political party that ruled the Soviet Union.
ANSWER: Communist parties (in Europe) (prompt on “political party” or similar non-specific terms; do not accept
or prompt on “socialist party”)
(9) This novel’s protagonist accidentally breaks his sister’s “Little Shirley Beans” record, but takes her to the
Central Park Zoo so she can ride the carousel. This novel’s protagonist reminisces about his brother Allie’s
poetry-scrawled baseball glove. (*) Phoebe is the sister of this novel’s protagonist, who is kicked out of Pencey
Prep at the start of this novel. For ten points, name this novel about Holden Caulfield, written by JD Salinger.
ANSWER: The Catcher in the Rye
(10) The player must operate one of these vehicles for eight continuous hours to score one point in an
unreleased Sega CD game starring Penn and Teller. Keanu Reeves and Sandra Bullock are forced to operate
one of these vehicles that has a bomb planted on it in the film (*) Speed. Players skydive out of one of these
vehicles at the beginning of Fortnite matches. For ten points, name this type of vehicle that Ms Frizzle drives for
“magic” field trips.
ANSWER: bus (accept any specific type of bus, including Penn and Teller’s Desert Bus, the Battle Bus, and the
Magic School Bus)
(11) These structures often include a sahn, an enclosed courtyard with a fountain to allow visitors to perform
wudu, a type of ritual cleansing. The tallest point on these structures is used by a muezzin to issue a call for
(*) prayer, and is called a minaret. These structures contain a raised platform called a minbar, from which sermons
are delivered by imams. For ten points, name these centers of Islamic worship.
ANSWER: mosque (accept masjid)
(12) The katabatic type of this phenomenon is cooled by glaciers, and the Santa Ana and Chinook ones are
extremely dry. An ane-mometer can be used to classify these on the (*) Beaufort scale. In the US, prevailing
westerly ones of these generated the Dust Bowl, and ones faster than 72 miles per hour are called “hurricane force.”
For ten points, name these large air movements that blow from regions of high pressure to low.
ANSWER: winds
(13) In a novel from this modern country, Josef Knecht [NEKT] becomes Magister Ludi in the province of
Castilia. The Glass Bead Game is from this country, as are The Sorrows of Young Werther and a work in which
(*) Mephistopheles makes a tragic deal with the title man, Faust. For ten points, name this country that is home to
Herman Hesse [HESS] and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe [GUR-tuh].
ANSWER: Germany (accept Federal Republic of Germany or Bundesrepublik Deutschland)
(14) This man recounted having to give Hugh Auld his wages from a Baltimore shipyard in one of his
autobiographies. This founder of The North Star newspaper argued for women’s suffrage at the Seneca Falls
Convention, and asked (*) “What, to a slave, is the Fourth of July?” in an 1852 speech. For ten points, name this
abolitionist who described his life as a slave in My Bondage and My Freedom and a best-selling Narrative of his
life.
ANSWER: Frederick Douglass
(15) A depiction of this scene by Salvador Dal´ı replaces the central object with a hypercube. Houses and a
synagogue burn in the background of Marc Chagall’s White version of this scene. In Gauguin’s [goh-GAN’s]
depiction of this scene, this event’s central figure stands on a small ledge with (*) nails through his feet and
hands. For ten points, name this biblical event, which in Gauguin’s painting shows the death of The Yellow Christ.
ANSWER: crucifixion (accept The White Crucifixion; prompt on “Corpus Hypercubus”)
(16) This country’s Gatun Lake was the largest man-made lake in the world when it was created in the early
20th century. This country earned its independence from its southern neighbor a decade after the French
gave up on a (*) construction project here that was eventually finished with American help. For ten points, name
this Central American country where a canal connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
ANSWER: Panama (accept Panama Canal)
(17) The dalton is a unit of this quantity, and another unit for this quantity appears in the denominator
of the formula for molality. Stoichiometry [stoh-ih-kee-ah-meh-tree] requires finding the molar form of this
quantity for compounds. Isotopes of an element (*) differ in this value, which is equal to the sum of each atom’s
protons and neutrons. The amu [A-M-U] is the standard unit of, for ten points, what physical quantity that can also
be measured in grams?
ANSWER: molar mass (accept molecular mass; accept molecular weight until “molality”)
(18) In 1993, the British newspaper The Independent published a positive personal relations story about
this man’s efforts to build a rural highway in Sudan using mujahideen labor. Operation (*) Neptune Spear
targeted this man, who was killed in Abbottabad, Pakistan in 2011 by Navy SEALs. For ten points, name this leader
of Al Qaeda and mastermind of the 9/11 attacks.
ANSWER: Osama bin Laden
a ham. A recluse in this novel is rumored to have stabbed his father with scissors. In this novel, (*) Tom
Robinson is accused of rape by Bob and Mayella Ewell, and is defended by the protagonist’s father, Atticus. Boo
Radley rescues Jem in, for ten points, what novel about the coming of age of Scout Finch, written by Harper Lee?
ANSWER: To Kill a Mockingbird
(20) A mathematician from what is now this country names a formula for calculating the area of a cyclic
quadrilateral, given its side lengths. Centuries before the invention of calculus, the power series expansions
for sine and cosine were developed by the (*) Kerala school in this country. The decimal number system
first appeared in the 7th century in, for ten points, what country where Brahmagupta wrote about mathematical
innovations, like zero, in Sanskrit?
ANSWER: India
Bonuses
(1) Alison Bechdel’s autobiographical work Fun Home is an example of this style of book. For ten points each,
Name this style of book, in which a story is told through comic book-style panels of pictures and words.
ANSWER: graphic novel (accept graphic memoir)
In this graphic novel, Art Spiegelman describes his father’s experiences during the Holocaust. In this novel, Nazis
are portrayed as cats stalking Jews, whom Spiegelman characterizes as the title animals.
ANSWER: Maus
In this two-part autobiographical graphic novel, Marjane Satrapi describes growing up in Iran during the Islamic
Revolution in the 1980s.
ANSWER: Persepolis
(2) This Enlightenment thinker wrote about proper methods of education in a work that included the “Profession
of Faith of a Savoyard Vicar,” a defense of religious thought that angered both Protestants and Catholics. For ten
points each,
Name this French philosopher and author of Emile ´ [ay-MEEL] who wrote that “man is born free, but everywhere is
in chains” to open his most famous work.
ANSWER: Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Rousseau’s [roo-SOH’s] best known work is titled for this philosophical concept, the implicit agreement between
people and their government in which some personal freedom is given up in exchange for protection of other rights.
ANSWER: social contract (accept contrat social; accept On the Social Contract; or, Principles of Political Rights;
accept Du contrat social; ou Principes du droit politique)
Rousseau’s Social Contract argued in favor of democracy and against the idea that this type of ruler was divinely
empowered to rule; Rousseau’s work thus inspired the French Revolution.
ANSWER: monarch (accept kings and/or queens; accept descriptions of royalty and other equivalents)
(3) Answer these questions about the principles of green chemistry, for ten points each.
A major goal of green chemistry is the use of agricultural byproducts to generate non-hazardous types of these
chemicals that dissolve the solute in a solution. Water is often called the “universal” one of these substances.
ANSWER: solvents
Many green chemists are developing totally sustainable ways of generating this engine fuel from vegetable oils.
Algae and waste grease from cooking can also be processed into this fuel.
ANSWER: biodiesel (prompt on “diesel”)
Green chemistry promotes the use of wood vinegar as a safe alternative to synthetic types of these chemicals like
DDT. Rachel Carson’s book Silent Spring and the 1984 Union Carbide disaster in India both concerned this type of
chemical.
ANSWER: pesticides (accept insecticides)
(4) In a poem about these animals, one of them “dips his wing / in the orange sun rays / and dares to claim the sky.”
For ten points each,
Name this animal. One of these animals “sings / with a fearful trill / of things unknown / but longed for still” in a
poem that declares “I know why the caged” one of these animals “sings.”
ANSWER: bird (accept I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings; accept the caged bird and/or the free bird)
I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings is the title of both a poem and an autobiography by this American poet of “On
the Pulse of Morning.”
ANSWER: Maya Angelou (accept Marguerite Annie Johnson)
Maya Angelou recited “On the Pulse of Morning” at one of these events in 1993. At one of these events for John
F. Kennedy in 1961, Robert Frost was scheduled to recite his poem “Dedication,” but recited “The Gift Outright”
instead.
ANSWER: presidential inauguration (prompt on any answer that includes “president” and the suggestion of a
ceremony)
(5) The Greeks referred to this man as Ozymandias. For ten points each,
Name this “great” Egyptian pharaoh who defeated the Nile “Sea People” and claimed a victory at the 1274 BCE
Battle of Kadesh.
ANSWER: Ramesses the Great (accept Ramesses II)
The “Sea People” were allies of these people, who fought Ramesses the Great at the Battle of Kadesh. The empire
of these people was largely based in modern Turkey.
ANSWER: Hittites
The Battle of Kadesh is generally agreed to be the largest battle of forces using this wheeled, horse-drawn vehicle.
ANSWER: war chariots
(6) Give the following about rectilinear polygons, which are usually drawn such that all of their sides are either
horizontal or vertical, for ten points each.
Like all polygons, rectilinear polygons can be classified by this adjective if every line segment between two points
on their edges stays within the interior of the polygon. Polygons without this quality are called concave.
ANSWER: convex
Every interior angle in a convex rectilinear polygon is this type of angle, with a measure between that of an acute
and an obtuse angle.
ANSWER: right angle (accept 90 degree angle; accept pi over 2 radian angle)
Tracing movement in this form of geometry will create a rectilinear polygon, because this type of distance is defined
by movements parallel to the Cartesian axes, as you would see while driving a car in a city.
ANSWER: taxicab geometry
(7) Answer the following about Pablo Picasso, for ten points each.
Picasso co-founded this geometric and fragmented style with Georges Braque. Many of his works were in the
“analytic” and “synthetic” forms of this style.
ANSWER: cubism (accept word forms like cubist)
This early cubist painting by Picasso depicts five angular, nude woman. The faces of two of the figures in this
painting are inspired by African masks.
ANSWER: Les Demoiselles d’Avignon [lay day-mwah-ZELLS dah-veen-YAWN] (accept The Young Women of
Avignon)
Before his cubist phase, Picasso went through this “period” in his work, which was characterized by cool tones and
depressing themes. The Old Guitarist is a painting from this period.
ANSWER: Blue Period
(8) In 1754, this man surrendered over 300 men to Louis Coulon de Villiers, the only military surrender of his
career. For ten points each,
Name this Virginian who, decades later, led the Continental Army during the American Revolution.
ANSWER: George Washington
Washington’s surrender was one of the precursors to this conflict. This war, the North American theater of the Seven
Years’ War, was named for the pair of opponents faced by the British and their colonial allies.
ANSWER: French and Indian War (prompt on “Seven Years’ War” before it is read)
After taking thirty-one casualties in a small skirmish, Washington surrendered this hastily-built fort to the French.
ANSWER: Fort Necessity
(9) This astronomer determined that the Andromeda Nebula was not actually a nebula. For ten points each,
the redshift of objects in space to their distance from an observer.
ANSWER: Edwin Powell Hubble
The Andromeda Nebula was actually one of these systems, outside the Milky Way. This term describes a rotating
collection of billions of stars with a black hole at its center, and can have a spiral or irregular shape.
ANSWER: galaxy (accept galaxies)
Hubble classified galaxies using a Y-shaped diagram named for this acoustical device. The two prongs of this
diagram separate the barred and unbarred spiral galaxies.
ANSWER: tuning fork diagram
(10) Some characters in this novel change a long-held slogan from “four legs good, two legs bad” to “four legs
good, two legs better.” For ten points each,
Name this novel about the growing dictatorship of Napoleon, an allegory of Soviet Russia that plays out in a
barnyard, written by George Orwell.
ANSWER: Animal Farm
In Animal Farm, this horse adopts the personal mantra “I will work harder” as he works tirelessly to build a silo.
ANSWER: Boxer
This elderly pig gives a speech that inspires the animals’ rebellion, but his death begins the power struggle between
Napoleon and Snowball.
ANSWER: Old Major
(11) Answer the following about water in the life of Jesus, for ten points each.
As a young adult, Jesus was submerged in the Jordan River by this man, the son of Elizabeth who was sent to
“prepare the way” for Jesus.
ANSWER: Saint John the Baptist (prompt on “John”)
At his mother’s request, Jesus performed this feat, his first miracle, during the wedding at Cana.
ANSWER: turning water into wine (accept descriptions)
Jesus gathered his disciples from around this sea, where he demonstrated his ability to walk on water.
ANSWER: The Sea of Galilee (accept Kinneret; accept Kinnereth; accept Lake of Gennesaret; accept Lake
Tiberias)
(12) In 2018, the Internet exerted enough pressure to make this musical experience happen, but it wasn’t that much
different from the original version. For ten points each,
Name this song, whose speaker notes that “It’s gonna take a lot to drag me away from you” before blessing the rains
in the title place.
ANSWER: (Weezer’s cover of Toto’s) “Africa”
The Internet campaign to get Weezer to cover “Africa” began with a tweet to this lead singer of Weezer.
ANSWER: Rivers Cuomo
Weezer’s music video for “Africa” doesn’t feature Rivers Cuomo; instead, Cuomo is played by this singer of
numerous polka covers and parody songs like “White and Nerdy.”
ANSWER: Alfred Matthew “Weird Al” Yankovic (accept either underlined portion)
(13) This body of water cuts into a US state, creating the Olympic Peninsula to its west. For ten points each,
Name this sound, which is connected to the Pacific Ocean via the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Its water reaches the cities
of Tacoma and Olympia.
ANSWER: Puget Sound
Puget Sound cuts into this US state in the Pacific Northwest, giving Seattle a coastline.
ANSWER: Washington
This highest mountain in Washington, and in and all of the Cascades, poses a massive volcanic threat to Tacoma
and other cities on Puget Sound.
ANSWER: Mount Rainier
(14) Answer these questions about electrolysis, for ten points each.
In electrolysis, an electric current is used to power a chemical reaction, commonly done to perform this action on
molecules. For example, performing electrolysis on water creates hydrogen gas and oxygen gas.
ANSWER: separating the molecule (accept equivalent descriptions, such as splitting the molecule into its
component elements; do not accept descriptions related to just a phase change)
One common electrolytic cell is the rechargeable battery using this lightest alkali metal with symbol Li.
ANSWER: lithium
An electrolytic cell can be modeled as two half-reactions: a reduction that occurs at the cathode, and an oxidation
that occurs at this positive electrode.
ANSWER: anode
(15) This man famously crossed the Rubicon to take control of Rome. For ten points each,
Name this Roman “dictator-in-perpetuity” who was killed on the Ides of March.
ANSWER: Gaius Julius Caesar (prompt on Caesar)
Prior to becoming dictator of Rome, Julius Caesar fought a group of people from this region, now a part of France.
His victory at the Battle of Alesia solidified Roman control of this region.
ANSWER: Gaul
This chief of the Arverni people was the greatest Gallic belligerent and lost at the Siege of Alesia. This man was
later paraded through Rome and strangled to death.
ANSWER: Vercingetorix [ver-sin-get-or-ix]
(16) In one myth, this god dresses up as Freyja at a wedding to retrieve his stolen weapon from the giant Thrym
[thrimm]. For ten points each,
Name this wielder of the hammer Mjolnir [mee-YOLL-neer], the Norse god of thunder.
ANSWER: Thor (accept Donar)
In the Prose Edda, Thor loses a wrestling match to Elli, who is the personification of this state of being, since no
one can avoid this state of being.
ANSWER: old age (accept any description of becoming elderly; do not accept or prompt on “death”)
At Ragnarok, Thor will kill and be killed by this creature. This creature is so large that its body wraps around the ¨
Earth.
ANSWER: Jormungandr ¨ [YOHR-mun-gahn-durr] (accept Midgard Serpent or World Serpent)
(17) This composer’s final opera was based on Tolstoy’s War and Peace. For ten points each,
Name this composer who adapted a fairy tale into his opera The Love For Three Oranges and wrote ballets based on
Romeo and Juliet and Cinderella.
ANSWER: Sergei Sergeyevich Prokofiev
Prokofiev is best known for this narrated work, which uses different instruments to represent characters such as the
bird, the cat, and a duck that gets swallowed alive by one of the title characters.
ANSWER: Peter and the Wolf (accept Petya ´ i volk)
This largest standard woodwind instrument represents the grandfather in Peter and the Wolf. This double-reed
instrument is usually held diagonally when played.
ANSWER: bassoon
(18) In a novella by this man, a town declines to intervene in the death of Santiago Nassar, though they are all
aware of his impending murder. For ten points each,
Name this Colombian author of Chronicle of a Death Foretold, One Hundred Years of Solitude, and a novel about a
love triangle between Florentino, Fermina, and Doctor Urbino.
ANSWER: Gabriel Garcia Marquez (prompt on partial last name)
Florentino, Fermina, and Doctor Urbino appear in a Garcia Marquez novel titled for Love in the Time of this illness,
which Doctor Urbino strives to eradicate. This illness is spread through contaminated drinking water.
ANSWER: cholera (accept Love in the Time of Cholera; accept colera ´ or El amore en los tiempos del colera ´ )
The Garcia Marquez novel One Hundred Years of Solitude follows the rise and fall of the Buendia family in the
town of Macondo, which depends on a plantation that grows bunches of these tropical, tree-grown fruits.
ANSWER: bananas
(19) By 1940, one-third of Queen Victoria’s male descendants are known to have inherited this disease. For ten
points each,
Name this genetic illness in which blood does not properly clot, leading to excessive bleeding after even mild
injuries.
ANSWER: hemophilia
Most cases of hemophilia are sex-linked because the mutation is carried on this chromosome. Females possess two
of this chromosome and males have one paired with a Y-chromosome.
ANSWER: X-chromosome
A less common sex-linked disorder is hypo-phospha-temia, also known as the dominant type of this bone disease.
Children with this disease cannot absorb vitamin D, resulting in short stature and painful, bowed legs.
ANSWER: rickets
(20) On October 20, 1973, this man ordered Elliot Richardson to fire Archibald Cox; when Richardson refused and
resigned, this man went down the line to William Ruckelshaus, who also refused to fire Cox and resigned. For ten
points each,
Name this US President who orchestrated the “Saturday Night Massacre.” Six months later, this man resigned once
it was clear he would be impeached for his part in the coverup of the Watergate scandal.
ANSWER: Richard Nixon
Until the Saturday Night Massacre, Elliot Richardson held this Cabinet post, which leads the Justice Department.
This is the only Cabinet post other than Vice President whose title does not include “Secretary.”
ANSWER: Attorney General
Nixon asked Richardson and Ruckelshaus to fire Archibald Cox from this position, the leader of the investigation
into the Watergate scandal. Robert Mueller currently holds this position with regards to Russian interference in the
2016 elections.
ANSWER: special prosecutor (accept special counsel; accept independent prosecutor; accept independent
counsel; prompt on prosecutor or counsel alone)