(1) This god was challenged by an older deity to turn himself into a hippopotamus. This god’s four children
include Imsety and Hapi. Hathor used milk to heal this god’s eye, which represented the (*) sun. This god
used a wooden boat painted to look like a stone to defeat his rival Seth in a race. For ten points, name this head of
the Egyptian pantheon, a falcon-headed Sky God.
ANSWER: Horus
(2) Cajal bodies are found within these structures, several of which occupy the coenocytic hyphae [coheh-noh-SIH-tick “HIGH”-fay] of fungi. The envelope of this structure is continuous with the rough (*)
endoplasmic reticulum. By definition, this structure is absent in prokaryotes, and during mitosis, the chromosomes
inside this structure become visible. For ten points, name this organelle that stores DNA, the control center of a cell.
ANSWER: cellular nucleus
(3) This poem’s title king names Wiglaf his successor as he dies from injuries sustained in a dragon fight,
years after he defeats a female monster in a lake near the mead-hall Heorot [HAY-oh-roht]. This poem’s title
Geatish [GATE-ish] warrior comes to the aid of King (*) Hrothgar [h-ROTH-gahr] by pulling off the arm of the
monster Grendel. For ten points, name this Anglo-Saxon epic poem.
ANSWER: Beowulf
(4) Moses Rose was called the “coward” of this location after refusing to cross a line in the sand. James
Bowie was elected to lead forces at this location but eventually shared command with William Travis. (*)
Davy Crockett was killed while defending this compound during the Texan Revolution. For ten points, name this
San Antonio mission, whose namesake battle inspired a rallying cry to “remember” this place.
ANSWER: The Alamo
(5) This artist’s sculptures of the Dying Slave and Rebellious Slave were meant to stand near statues of Leah
and Rachel at the tomb of Pope Julius II. This sculptor of a (*) Horned Moses signed the sash of a sculpture of
a young-looking woman who cradles her dead son. For ten points, name this Italian sculptor, who depicted Mary
holding Jesus in Pieta.
ANSWER: Michelangelo di Ludovico Buonarroti (accept either underlined name)
(6) The protagonist of this novel recognizes the wife of the Comte de la Fere by the fleur-de-lis ` [flure-duh-lee]
branded on her shoulder. In this novel, Milady de Winter tries to expose his affair with Queen Anne on the
orders of (*) Cardinal Richelieu, but the plan is foiled by Athos, Porthos, and Aramis. For ten points, name this
novel by Alexandre Dumas [doo-MAH] about three swordsman and their friend d’Artagnan [dar-TAN-yan].
ANSWER: The Three Musketeers (accept Les trois mousquetaires)
(7) Two of these particles are produced during electron-positron annihilation, and when fired at a metal,
these particles cause electrons to be ejected. These particles’ energy equals their frequency times Planck’s
constant. They lack both (*) charge and rest mass, but are the force carriers of electromagnetism. These particles
travel through a vacuum at nearly three times ten to the eighth meters per second. For ten points, name these
particles of light.
ANSWER: photons
(8) While running for President, Ross Perot warned that this deal would cause a “giant sucking sound.” The
Zapatistas opposed this agreement, which was criticized for leading to the rise of maquiladoras, (*) factories
that import parts and export finished goods. In September 2018, the three countries involved in this deal agreed to
replace it with the USMCA. For ten points, name this 1994 economic agreement between Mexico, Canada, and the
US.
ANSWER: NAFTA (or North American Free Trade Agreement)
(9) In a show about these creatures, Chloe Park befriends three of these animals who often form a “stack”
for transportation. Another of these animals is adopted by the Brown family after being found near a London
(*) train station. A “silly old” one of these animals resides in the Hundred Acre Wood in 2018’s Christopher Robin.
For ten points, what type of animal are the literary characters Paddington and Winnie the Pooh?
ANSWER: bears (accept We Bare Bears; accept Paddington Bear; accept Pooh Bear)
(10) Engineers in this country developed a building technique that mimics burdock blossoms and uses
pebbles, not mortar, to fill in cracks between rocks; that method was used to build a castle whose tenshu
[ten-shoo] was destroyed in 1615. A shrine in this country has a (*) red gate that appears to float during high
tide. The Temple of the Golden Pavilion is a Zen Buddhist temple in, for ten points, what country, the home of the
Ise [ee-say] Shrine and Osaka Castle?
ANSWER: Japan (accept Nippon-koku; accept Nihon-koku)
(11) It is not a volcano, but the “blister” type of this feature is caused by the uplift of gases trapped between
lava layers. The Villa Luz one in southern Mexico contains a stream of sulfuric acid, and most are located in
areas of karst terrain. Specialized (*) troglodyte species can be found within these features. For ten points, name
this kind of geologic feature that often contain stalagmites and stalactites, such as the Carlsbad Caverns.
ANSWER: cave (accept cavern until it is read)
(12) In a novel by this author, the title demon writes a series of letters to his nephew Wormwood. In addition
to The Screwtape Letters, this man wrote a novel in which a girl is invited to tea by a (*) faun who she meets at
a lamppost, and the siblings Peter, Susan, Edmund, and Lucy meet Aslan and rule the title location. For ten points,
name this author whose novel The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe is part of The Chronicles of Narnia.
ANSWER: Clive Staples “C.S.” Lewis
(13) When this son of Azar was tasked with selling idols, he mocked the idols and left his home. This man
challenged Namrud to make the sun rise in the west over a debate about the power of Allah. This man had
a son with (*) Hajar, an Egyptian slave who served his wife, Sarah. For ten points, name this Islamic prophet who
built the Ka’aba, the father of Isaac and Ismail.
ANSWER: Ibrahim (accept Abraham; accept Abram)
(14) A plan for this type of program was opposed by the “Harry and Louise” ads, and failed in 1994 despite
the support of First Lady Hillary Clinton. The 2012 Supreme Court case NFIB v. Sibelius upheld a law that
reformed this service. The (*) single-payer option would let taxes pay for this service, but that idea was not
included the PPACA in 2010. For ten points, name this service that would be reformed by proposals like “Medicare
for All.”
ANSWER: healthcare (accept any additional or related information; accept Obamacare after “2012” is read)
(15) In a movement titled for this figure, the brass plays a sudden F-sharp major chord before a slow section
that was later adapted for the hymn “Thaxted.” In another work, a movement after “Mercury, the Winged
Messenger” is named for a (*) “Bringer of Jollity” with this name. For ten points, give this shared name of
Mozart’s final symphony, a movement of Gustav Holst’s The Planets, and the chief Roman god.
ANSWER: Jupiter (accept Jupiter, the Bringer of Jollity; accept Jupiter Symphony)
(16) The isoelectric point is a value of this quantity such that a peptide has a net neutral charge. This
quantity is plotted on the y-axis of a titration curve. Buffer systems resist changes to this quantity, an increase
in which can turn the (*) indicator phenolphthalein [fee-nolf-thay-leen] from colorless to pink. For ten points,
name this quantity, the measure of acidity, which is seven for pure water.
ANSWER: pH [P-H] (prompt on descriptions like “acidity” or “basicity”)
(17) This leader proposed the “Percentages” agreement, which divided up Eastern Europe into spheres of
influence. This man led the “caretaker ministry” after abruptly resigning to force new elections. Clement
Attlee replaced this man at the (*) Potsdam Conference in 1945. This politician met with Stalin and Roosevelt at
Yalta to discuss Allied strategy. For ten points, name this Prime Minister of the UK during World War II.
ANSWER: Winston Churchill
(18) Most types of this shape have a line passing through the Exeter point, the nine-point-circle’s center, and
several other points; that line passing through this shape is named for Euler [oy-ler]. The Law of (*) Sines
and the Law of Cosines apply to these shapes, which may be described as scalene or equilateral. The interior angles
add up to 180 degrees in, For ten points, what polygon with three sides?
ANSWER: triangle
(19) A river on this continent contained a set of seven cascades known as the Guaira Falls before it was
destroyed by the Itaipu [it-EYE-pu] Dam. The boto river dolphins live in the (*) Orinoco River on this
continent. The Parana River forms the Rio de la Plata when it meets with a river named for one of this continent’s ´
twelve countries. For ten points, name this continent where a massive rainforest surrounds the Amazon River.
ANSWER: South America
(20) A work narrated by this character was allegedly plagiarized from The Vicar of Weilby. In another work,
this character says “All I wanted was to go somewheres” while complaining about being scolded by Miss (*)
Watson. This boy meets the Duke and the Dauphin while rafting down the Mississippi river with the slave Jim. For
ten points, name this narrator of Tom Sawyer, Detective, a Missouri boy created by Mark Twain.
ANSWER: Huckleberry “Huck” Finn (accept any underlined name)